The Samsung Galaxy S10 is the Android phone for everyone. It might not be as groundbreaking as many expected, but it’s a complete package that’s easy to recommend for most people. Of the numerous Android phones released every year, none arrive with quite the level of hype that accompanies a flagship Samsung Galaxy device. The Galaxy S10 is the biggest phone release of 2019 so far, and it deserves the many accolades that are likely coming its way. This is an Android phone for the masses, for those bored with iPhones playing it safe – and for those who want every single feature going. So, where to start? This review is of a Galaxy S10 (UK Exynos 9820 version) unit provided to us by Vodafone, and was conducted over the course of ten days. Previously, we’d been using the Samsung Galaxy S10 Plus, which comes with many of the same features. Unlike past years, the S10 isn’t the instant standout model in Samsung’s new lineup. It’s the middle child here, sandwiched between the more affordable Galaxy S10e(which takes all the big features, cramming them into a smaller body) and the Galaxy S10 Plus (with its larger screen, dual front cameras and heftier battery). So is there really any point opting for the regular S10 over those other two options? Well, yes: The Samsung Galaxy S10 has a lovely screen and design, with a minor catch The 6.1-inch Dynamic AMOLED screen instantly impresses, taking up 88.3% of the front of the Galaxy S10. Not only does it stretch and curve almost edge-to-edge, giving the impression you’re holding nothing but screen, it comes with all the tech you’d expect would feature in a good display.
This is an HDR10+ panel, boosting colours and dynamic range when you’re viewing supported content from Netflix and YouTube, for example. Watch a few episodes of Star Trek: Discovery and you’ll instantly notice the deep colours and intense brightness. I wouldn’t normally use a phone screen to watch content over extended periods, but the quality on display here makes it surprisingly immersive.
The screen is bright, too, which is essential for outdoor viewing and the previously mentioned HDR content. It’s a little tricky to gauge just how bright this screen gets due to the variety of boosting modes Samsung engages, but I measured a peak brightness of 350 nits in regular use. DisplayMate claims it can match the 1250 nits suggested by Samsung in its own test. Brightness ramps up when you’re using the phone in direct sunlight or utilizing the screen enhancer mode. The latter adds a faux-HDR effect to regular content – YouTube videos, for example – which ups the brightness to give a more cinematic look. It works a treat, even if it does consume battery life at double the rate compared to if it’s turned off.
The display has a few other quirks, too, all of which help to shape the look of the Galaxy S10. The first is the new Infinity-O display, which is Samsung’s effort to steer away from the regular style of notch. Instead of a dip in the display, as seen on the iPhone XS, the S10 moves its front camera into a circular cutout that sits towards the top-right of the panel. Unlike the notch, the screen flows around the hole, which makes for a more seamless design. I much prefer the circular cutout here rather than the longer, pill-shaped version you’ll see on the S10 Plus; it’s noticeably less intrusive when watching videos. Nevertheless, it isn’t perfect and certain apps, games especially, still assume the hole is a notch and therefore display a black bar that covers the whole top portion of the screen. Hopefully, developers will update said apps when this style of cutout becomes more popular.
I’m less enamoured by Samsung’s continued use of curved displays. As seen in the S8 and S9, the sides of the Galaxy S10 slope down, blending into the metal rim. Design-wise, it’s a trait that’s a few years old now – and heavily adopted by other phones. Nevertheless, it still has that slick, instantly eye-catching finish that gets it noticed in the sea of boxy, rectangular slabs. However, although it might look attractive, it makes actual use of the device more difficult. I’ve experienced numerous accidental presses with the curved Galaxy S10 than I have done with the flat Pixel 3 or iPhone XS. It consistently registers accidental presses from my palm and I’m having to adapt the way I hold the phone to counter the problem. You’ll likely get used to it, but even having used both the S10 Plus and S10 over the past couple of weeks, it remains an issue. The rest of the design follows the same blueprint Samsung’s used for the past few iterations of its flagship phones. You’ll find glass both front and back, a metal rim sandwiched between them, and a super-precise finish. There isn’t much of a size difference between the Plus and the regular-sized S10 (the Plus has a 6.4-inch screen as opposed to 6.1 inches), but I do find that the smaller device feels more comfortable to hold and is easier to navigate, not requiring me to stretch my thumb too far. If you’re coming from an S9 or an iPhone then you’ll likely feel a lot more at home with the S10.
The Galaxy S10 is feature-packed, with an in-display fingerprint sensor and reverse wireless charging Samsung has a fondness for “features”. It loves to cram its phones with every imaginable option, if only to have plenty to shout about when it comes to advertising. It’s an approach that’s quite the opposite of Apple, which has historically rejected options such as expandable storage. With the Galaxy S10, Samsung’s focus on features remains. If there’s a feature you’ve been hankering after, then it’s likely included in the S10: wireless charging, expandable storage, a headphone jack (you won’t see that too often in 2019), as well as inventive additions such as reverse charging and an in-display fingerprint sensor.
That in-display sensor is the standout – and while the S10 isn’t the first handset to include one, it’s comfortably the best I’ve used. The fingerprint sensor on the Galaxy S10 doesn’t reside on the back or inside the home button. Instead, it’s found directly beneath the screen. Once setup – a process you’ll be requested to do at the start – you unlock the phone by pressing your finger against a fingerprint outline that sits towards the bottom of the screen. It does everything your traditional capacitive sensor does; it just doesn’t need to be there messing up the back of the phone. As futuristic as it is, the in-display sensor isn’t quite as effective as the traditional unit of the S9 or iPhone. It requires a firmer press. If the fingerprint sensor on the S9 works 95% of the time, on the S10 it’s closer to 70%. However, it is more efficient and reliable than the optical sensors that feature on the OnePlus 6T and Huawei Mate 20 Pro. The ultrasonic version here doesn’t require light to work and doesn’t require you to press down so firmly.
Another feature on the S10 that’s similar to something you’ll see on the Huawei Mate 20 Pro is reverse wireless charging. Called Wireless PowerShare, this lets you turn the S10 into a Qi charger for compatible products. For example, you could charge your iPhone XS this way, or Samsung’s new Galaxy Buds. It’s a clever addition, but like the in-display fingerprint scanner, it needs a bit more work. It’s super-slow to charge, and you need to turn it on every time you want to charge a device. The S10’s benchmarks point to superb all-round performance
Joining the packed feature list is a selection of internal components – which will vary depending on the your region. I’ve been using the European model, which ships with Samsung’s own Exynos 9820 chipset and 8GB of RAM. If you’re buying the phone in the USA, your device will be powered by the Qualcomm Snapdragon 855. Judging a phone’s performance is tricky, especially when it’s fresh out of the box. Whether you’re paying £799 for the Galaxy S10 or £269 for the Moto G7 Plus, phones tend to initially be super-fast but then gradually slow down. Since the S10 is powered by the very latest available internals, it should be no surprise that it’s a performance beast, churning out benchmark scores at the top-end of phones we’ve reviewed. Simply put, no task on this phone feels slow or laggy. Nor are there any apps – that I’ve tested – that really push the hardware to its limits. The same is true of games. The Galaxy S10 will smoothly run any game at the highest possible settings without running into trouble. Titles load up noticeably faster than a Samsung Galaxy S9, and only slightly slower than an iPhone XS. This is also one of the first handsets to ship with support for Wi-Fi 6, so if you have a capable router then you’ll notice a slightly altered logo in the status bar. There’s no 5G, though, since the next-gen data speeds are restricted to an as-yet priceless Samsung Galaxy S10 5G variant. The Galaxy S10’s camera line-up is another headline feature. Three can be found on the back, with another unit on the front for selfies and face unlock. The main rear camera is an optically stabilized 12-megapixel sensor, with an aperture that can shift between f/1.5 for night shots and f/2.4 for the day. There’s an ultra-wide, 16-megapixel f/2.2 sensor, too, and a stabilized 12-megapixel tele sensor for zooming. Of the three, it’s the ultra-wide sensor that’s new – and the implementation is similar to that used by Huawei in the Mate 20 Pro. In the app, you can zoom out to enter wide view and there’s somewhat of a fisheye effect on the results.
The main camera consistently judges exposure better than its predecessor, while the improved HDR mode helps give you a good dynamic range across most scenes, with fewer blown out highlights and overexposed shots. Low light performance in general is good, if a little behind the very best. The main camera’s bright f/1.5 aperture (which automatically reverts to f/2.4 in brighter conditions) gives it a strong base to work from, though the S10 can still be a bit heavy-handed with noise reduction and image processing, which smudges out some fine details. This isn’t too noticeable when viewed on the S10’s screen, but photos can look more like paintings when cropped or viewed on a bigger screen. The S10’s smarter ‘scene optimiser’ mode, which works on all three cameras, performs well in most situations. It can now recognize up to 30 different scenes, including faces and night scenes, and tweaks the colours to make them vibrant and punchy without going too far towards oversaturation. The only downsides are the occasional mistake – for example, recognizing a glass building as the sky and giving it an unnatural blue cast – and that its Super Night Shot mode doesn’t seem to be quite as powerful as the ones seen on the Google Pixel 3 or Huawei Mate 20 Pro, with no way to manually turn it on. Still, the S10’s bokeh effects are every bit as good as its rivals, reliably cutting out faces and objects and applying realistic gradual blur. You can also tweak the level of fake bokeh after a shot when using the Live Focus mode, but it’s best to keep the intensity on the low side for maximum realism. While nothing major, there do seem to be a couple of bugs in the S10’s own camera app. The focal length wheel, which lets you zoom in between each camera’s default view, sometimes opens when you try to press the shutter, preventing you from taking a shot. If you move quickly between the three cameras, the autofocus also occasionally locks up before settling down again. These will no doubt get fixed in a software update.
Video recording is handled well, especially thanks to the new super-steady stabilization option. This uses the ultra-wide sensor to record and then crops in, smoothing out your footage and ridding it off the judder often associated with mobile video recording. Samsung has crafted an excellent phone in the S10 with a gorgeous screen, high-end internals and a bevy of great features all packed inside a well-designed body. However, it isn’t perfect. Samsung’s One UI sits atop Android 9, and while it’s a big improvement over Samsung’s previous attempts at software, it remains ugly and bloated. One UI’s aim is to make the software elements more accessible on larger screens. Apps that feature multiple input options towards the top – messages, for example – are pushed to the bottom, so you don’t need to dislocate your thumb trying to reach them. The majority of Samsung’s own apps have been updated to benefit from this design, and it does make navigation easier.
But the software is still full of useless additions. The virtual assistant Bixby is, and always has been, inferior to Google’s excellent Assistant – but it’s so tied in to Samsung’s apps that it’s hard to get rid of. There’s reams of bloatware here too, including multiple Microsoft Office apps and Samsung’s own version of many of Google’s own apps – calendar, browser and messages, for example.
For battery life the S10 isn’t as good as some rivals; even similarly sized handsets such as the Huawei P20 Pro beat the S10 for endurance. However, it’s slightly better than the Galaxy S9 and roughly comparable with the iPhone X and iPhone XS. During my 10 days with the phone – I’ve been reviewing the European Exynos 9820 version, so US-based buyers with the Snapdragon 855 version might see different results – I haven’t always managed to get from a morning alarm to 11pm without forcing the phone into either a battery-saver mode or worrying it will die-out during something important. If you want a more detailed look at the battery life, head to our dedicated Samsung Galaxy S10 review battery life page. Using the bundled charger, the S10’s 3400mAh battery goes from 0-100% in around 90 minutes. You can get yourself 40% in roughly 40 minutes which is handy for a quick top-up. There haven’t been any huge improvements to the charging tech, and there’s no high-speed method to rival the Mate 20 Pro’s Super Charge. This is a shame, but the lack of improvement isn’t quite as obvious as it is with the larger S10 Plus as that battery takes much longer to charge. If wireless charging is more your style, expect to get a full charge in just over two hours if you’re using Samsung’s own Fast Charge capable pad. There isn’t a more complete flagship Android phone you can buy right now than the Samsung Galaxy S10 – and its two biggest competitor are, at this moment, the smaller S10e and the pricier S10 Plus. So is there a reason to buy the S10 over those two other choices? The S10e is cheaper and ditches the curved screen, while the S10 Plus has a bigger screen and battery. Being the middle child, it does feel like the regular might get left out. But I’d say the S10 is the easiest choice. It’s the perfect mixture of size and feature-set, with a price tag that’s £200 less than the iPhone XS.


      



