For many people, the world of smartphones has two players: Samsung Galaxy and Apple iPhone. And realistically, there isn't much chance of people switching between the two in any given upgrade cycle. Samsung dominates the non-iPhone market in any location around the world that has the purchasing power to afford $1000 smartphones; and even outperforms Apple in many others. So it's no surprise the technology world stops and stares every time Samsung refreshes the Galaxy S line. No matter what the Galaxy S10 and S10+ brought to the table this year, it was going to be covered and analyzed to every extent possible. Thankfully for us all, the Galaxy S10 is a great phone — due in no small part to the reality that it's mostly unchanged from last year's Galaxy S9 (and even the S8 before it). Samsung once again took its dominant position in hardware, display, specs and features and simply turned it all up another level for 2019. The result is a phone that's an easy buy for just about anyone. Samsung has iterated on this same basic design concept since the Galaxy S6, slowly changing the proportions, stretching the edges and increasing the scale with each subsequent phone. It's been a successful one to be sure; it's more than a coincidence that just about every high-end smartphone has coalesced to look like the phones Samsung's been making since 2015. So you can't blame Samsung for keeping with what's worked so well. The Galaxy S10, and the larger Galaxy S10+ I've been using for this review, are brilliantly executed designs. The key theme of these phones is pure efficiency: getting as much hardware, as many specs, and as much capability into as compact of a body as possible. The GS10+ has the same effective screen real estate as the Note 9 from just a few months ago, yet is smaller in every dimension, 25 grams lighter, and has a larger battery. Just as impressively, you get every feature that was here before. A microSD card slot sits next to the SIM. A headphone jack accompanies the USB-C port on the bottom. Stereo speakers give you a roughly 60/40 split between the bottom and top. It's such a treat to see Samsung still standardize on these core tenets. With so little space to work with, it means these phones don't necessarily have much room for extra visual flair our flourishes to catch the eyes, which basically leaves the entire task to the glass backs with their brilliant hues and color-shifting properties. And if you opt for the highest-end GS10+ models, you get a ceramic back that adds a distinct look and a noticeable increase in heft. But let's be honest, you're probably going to put a case on the phone anyway — and I wouldn't blame you, because the phone's quite slippery in the hand. The only downside to be found with this hyper-efficient design is potential usability issues when it comes to accidental palm touches. This is the first "infinity display" curved Samsung phone I've actually had troubles with accidental touches on. Whether that's due to an even smaller amount of metal on the side of the phone, changes in its palm rejection software or some combination, it's noticeable when holding the larger Galaxy S10+ — I've been accidentally touching interface elements and inadvertently pressing keys while typing. A thin case will "solve" this problem, but after years of hearing other people complain about this with Samsung phones, I finally experienced it for myself with the latest generation. The real stunner that will take all of your attention, though, is the latest AMOLED display. Take your pick of the 6.1-inch Galaxy S10 or 6.4-inch Galaxy S10+, it doesn't matter — the display is once again amazing and the benchmark all other companies are chasing from some distance. Official testing from DisplayMatetells the technical story of how well the GS10 performs in colors, accuracy, brightness, viewing angles and reflection, but it all passes the eye test: if I have my choice of any phone in the world purely for its display, I choose the Galaxy S10. The one aspect of Samsung's mobile displays that continuously impresses is just how bright they are while also having low reflectivity — a combination that makes visibility in direct sunlight a non-issue. Not having to shade the screen with your hand or by turning your body is something you take for granted when you use a non-Samsung phone. And you don't have to give up anything to get this great feature; the display is awesome in every other aspect at the same time. Samsung's move to an in-display fingerprint sensor is the only controversial decision it made this year. Actually, the only controversial things Samsung has done in the last handful of years have all related to biometric security. Moving the fingerprint sensor to a nonsensical place, and trying to rely on iris scanning were solid blunders in their own right. (Iris scanning is gone now, by the way.) And now, we have another attempt: an in-display fingerprint sensor. This isn't the first we've seen, but it is the first using this type of technology: ultrasonic, using sound waves, rather than optical, which uses a camera. I'll lay it out simply: the ultrasonic fingerprint sensor is better than the optical ones I've used (primarily, the OnePlus 6T), but it is not as fast, accurate or easy to use as a modern capacitive fingerprint sensor. That shouldn't really come as any surprise, as capacitive sensors are a mature technology while the in-display sensors are still relatively new. But it's worth making clear. There is no situation in which the ultrasonic fingerprint sensor has been faster or more consistent than the Galaxy S9's rear-mounted capacitive sensor. That's incredibly unfortunate. Having the sensor in the display adds the benefit of being able to unlock your phone while it's sitting flat on a table or when you're holding it loosely and can't reach where a rear sensor would be. But the sensor requires far more effort to find the "sweet spot" where you know it'll unlock right away. I found myself pressing harder on the screen to flatten out my print, which helped, but the zone where the sensor will read is smaller than you'd think. Once you get the muscle memory down of knowing exactly where to put your thumb, it's quite fast. But it isn't as consistent as a capacitive sensor, and the time it takes to reject a bad press and then re-press is longer than we're all used to. The in-display fingerprint sensor is a negative, perhaps the only negative of the Galaxy S10, but it doesn't (or shouldn't) reach the level of being a compromise that will cause someone to skip buying the phone. If you decide to go with the faster (read: less secure) face unlock solution you'll only see the fingerprint sensor for secure apps and purchases; and once you learn how to use this new sensor type the awkwardness of the whole situation is greatly diminished. The Galaxy S10 leans on the same main and telephoto camera pairing we saw in the Galaxy S9+, though that's being a bit generous considering the main sensor hasn't changed substantially since the Galaxy S8 and the telephoto since the Note 8. That means a 12MP "Dual Pixel" sensor behind each lens, with a variable f/1.7 or f/2.4 aperture on the main and f/2.4 on the telephoto. Fine, but not necessarily new. What's supposed to make up for the static hardware is software and processing. Samsung is yet again talking a big game about AI and an NPU (Neural Processing Unit) providing new-and-improved photo quality. It certainly succeeds in creating great-looking photos, although the level to which it has improved over the Galaxy S9 and Note 9 is entirely questionable. The photos are really good. I'm just struggling to find the places where they're appreciably better than the great photos I've been taking with my S9+ and Note 9 for a year prior. Samsung's strengths are all still here: the camera is incredibly fast to capture in all situations, the interface is easy to use, the dynamic range and colors are fantastic, and you always get a bright and usable photo in every situation. It feels like the GS10+ is adding a little extra juice to the HDR processing, and in some situations you're getting something a bit more vivid than what the Note 9 would've done … but the margins are slim. That's not a bad thing, it's just a little disappointing when taken into the reality that the last generation was, in itself, not a huge upgrade from the year before. That's particularly the case in really low light photos, where the GS10+ is still clearly behind the Google Pixel 3. You always get something usable in really dark scenes, but it's downright incapable of producing the mind-blowing photos a few competitors do — even with the new scene optimizer ostensibly switching to an extra-low-light mode automatically. I found the best way to get the best shots is to manually drop the exposure to keep the camera from trying so hard to brighten the image; you get a darker photo, but one that isn't blotchy and filled with chroma noise from aggressive (bad) smoothing. Considering the GS10's camera sensor has large pixels and a very wide aperture, it's surprising to see such mediocre performance in super-dark scenes where (admittedly few) other companies have figured it out.



