We're here to help you decide if it's the new Android phone is right for you, explain what's new about the Galaxy S10, and ultimately decide if it's now the best Android phone for 2019. It's a tough one to call, especially as it was released alongside the Samsung Galaxy Fold foldable phone, but here we go! There are three different Galaxy S10 models: the Galaxy S10, a bigger and more expensive Galaxy S10+, and smaller, cheaper Galaxy S10e. There's also the 5G Galaxy S10 variant, but that isn't being released yet. All of them are seriously attractive devices, though, and that's mainly because of a major redesign. Samsung has adopted its brand new Infinity O display, which is an evolution on the Galaxy S9's Infinity Display. The front of the handset is filled almost entirely with display, which looks genuinely fantastic. It's a bit space-age, honestly. Apple is known for its top branding, but Samsung is fighting back hard with this eye-catching design – and it'll absolutely stand out in public. It's impossible to say whether Samsung will win the 2019 smartphone battle, but the Galaxy S10 certainly has the hardware chops to do well. For instance, there are three cameras on the back, which work together to take pin-sharp snaps. We've had a brief play with the Galaxy S10 camera, and can confirm it's as fast and accurate as you'd hope. We'll need to test it in a full review, but our early impressions are positive. Of course, the iPhone XS had a ludicrously impressive camera that has received rave reviews all around.
Relying on a triple-camera setup won't be enough: Samsung will need to make sure this snapper's shooting software holds up under scrutiny, too. The phone also ran smoothly, which is likely thanks to the upgraded 8nm Exynos processor (octa-core) on board. However, Samsung is up against seriously stiff competition – Apple's A12 Bionic chip inside the iPhone XS is supremely fast, and even beats some laptops and desktop computers. On paper, the Galaxy S10 looks like a true beast, but how will it fare during extended use? And can it beat the iPhone? Nothing is certain! Stay tuned for our full review. Samsung announced the Galaxy S10 on February 20, 2019 at a special Samsung Unpacked event. The Galaxy S10 and the Galaxy S10+ will both be available to pre-order from February. And the official Galaxy S10 release date is set for March 8, 2019 – which is when pre-orders will start shipping. There's also a 5G version of the Galaxy S10, but this won't ship until summer 2019. Probably the headline feature of the Samsung Galaxy S10 is its re-designed front. Like the iPhone XS, Samsung has opted for an "all-screen" design, where the front of the phone is filled (almost entirely) with display. The only exception is a tiny pinhole cut-out in the top right-hand corner of the phone, which is reserved for a selfie camera. The results is a screen-to-body ratio of 93.1%, which is higher than the Galaxy S9's 83.6%. The phone comes in four colours – Prism Green, Prism White, Prism Black, and Prism Blue – and generally looks very attractive. Samsung hasn't revealed exactly how much the Galaxy S10 and Galaxy S10+ will cost.
However, leaked info previously suggested that the Galaxy S10 would cost £799 or £999 depending on your chosen model. And the Galaxy S10+ is rumoured to cost £899, £1,099 and £1,399 depending on the model.





 
