The fourth season of “Game of Thrones” began on Sunday night, and as the show, like its antihero Jaime Lannister, enters middle age, it faces a question that most long-running series must eventually address: how to proceed after the original animating conflict has been settled, or at least attenuated?
Tony Soprano had to move past his mother, one way or another. Sam and Diane couldn’t bicker forever. Some Oceanic 815 survivors had to eventually make it off the island. So what comes next?
In this case, the hostilities between the Lannisters and the Starks — sparked in the pilot when Jaime the Kingslayer (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) turned kid-maimer and shoved poor Bran (Isaac Hempstead-Wright) out of that window — have sorted out decisively (for now) in favor of House Lannister, thanks to last season’s instantly notorious Red Wedding sequence. The point was driven home in the very first scene from Sunday’s premiere, when a Mephistophelean Tywin Lannister (Charles Dance), his pointy face aglow in the fiery forge, oversaw the melting down and reconstituting of the Stark family weapon.
What comes next appears to be that the Lannisters, now reunited and decisively in charge, turn ever more toxically against one another. Tywin’s decision to turn the “absurdly large” Stark sword, heavy with the burden of power wielded responsibly, into two separate Lannister weapons — the “Two Swords” of the episode’s title, presumably — points up the deeper divisions rending the family. To wit:
• Jaime made a long and tortured return to King’s Landing only to be marginalized by his father, who wants to shunt him off to the family compound; derided by his sociopathic son-phew, King Joffrey (Jack Gleeson); and dumped by his own sister. (Good luck to the seat-assigner for the coming royal wedding.)
• Cersei (Lena Headey), the sister in question, is increasingly bitter and buzzed, her lips curved cruelly as she nurses a bottomless wine glass and gripes about her father and wayward brother. Jaime protests that he murdered people to return to her, but she is unmoved. “You took too long,” she said, which seems deeply unfair, but I’m fine with it. Honestly, I would watch a series that consisted solely of Cersei getting drunk and complaining. (Her caustic monologue during the siege of King’s Landing in Season 2 was probably the meanest thing I’ve ever laughed at.)
• The noble Tyrion (Peter Dinklage), meanwhile, is openly mocked both within and outside the walls of the Red Keep — and that’s as good as it gets for him most days. “My nephew the king wants to murder me; my wife hates me because my father murdered her family,” he tells Shae(Sibel Kekilli) in a moment of self-pity. He never received due credit for saving King’s Landing in the Battle of the Blackwater, but, somewhat uncharacteristically, he seems to miss that merely acknowledging that reality, much less complaining about it, is ill-advised in the court of a monstrous and insecure boy-king. Tyrion seems set up for a fall this season — an HBO teaser video finds him imprisoned in a dungeon. This is unfortunate, in part because he seems to be the only person who realizes it’s a terrible idea to invite wedding guests who want to kill your whole family.
The Lannisters’ debts may be paid and their power consolidated, but this is not a happy clan. Tywin the patriarch would guffaw at the notion that happiness matters, were he physically capable of mirth — the dominance of the Lannister name is all. But we all know what absolute power does, and while the show keeps reinforcing this notion, a larger point seems to be one about the ultimate inconsequence of political striving in the face of a true existential threat. Like, say, an army of the undead bearing down from the north.
Closer to home, another crisis has arrived in the person of the bloodthirsty wedding guest Oberyn Martell (Pedro Pascal), a Dorne prince nicknamed the “Red Viper,” in case it wasn’t clear that he may be something of a menace. First seen wolfishly pawing at prostitutes as brooding chords intone, Prince Oberyn might as well have had TROUBLE tattooed on his forehead even before he shish-kebabbed a Lannister henchman for sassing him. He went on to tell Tyrion that he blames Tywin for the slaughter of his sister, the former queen, and her children. “Tell your father I’m here,” he tells Tyrion. “Tell him the Lannisters aren’t the only ones who pay their debts.”
A belated punch line comes a few scenes later when the benighted King Joffrey shrugs off security planning for the big wedding, saying, “I don’t expect any trouble.” Joffrey, my weasel-faced friend, I do not concur.
Meanwhile, back at the Wall, Jon Snow (Kit Harington) is being called onto the carpet — or whatever passes for carpet at the icy edge of civilization.
One of the ingenious pleasures of “Game of Thrones” is that for all the convoluted narrative twists, its 78 subplots (rough estimate) tend to unfold along user-friendly genre lines. You have your high melodrama (King’s Landing), your buddy-cop capers (Jaime and Brienne, Arya Stark and the Hound), your humble hero’s quest (Bran).
In Snow, hardened by his Donnie Brascostint with the Wildlings, we have what appears to be a burgeoning Loose Cannon, testily answering to soft-jowled superiors whining about procedure. Did he kill his partner and sleep with the enemy? Sure. Because that’s how things get done out on the ice. While you were up here wringing your hands over oaths, Snow was uncovering an impending invasion by Mance Rayder and his 100,000-strong army of Thenns, Hornfoots and giants, and getting arrows in the back for his troubles. You wanna hang him for it, go ahead. Yeah, didn’t think so.
And while we’re here, how about a big hand (sorry) for those Thenns, who are, I believe, the show’s first cannibals? Welcome, boys. Snow’s nicely marbled bosses in the Wall would make for mighty fine eating when the time comes, but it’s unclear whether the Thenns and Wildlings can co-exist long enough to launch the planned joint attack from the south.
Also about due for an onslaught: the citizens of Meereen, the next stop on Daenerys Targaryen’s liberation tour. Look, you’re probably not going to find many saints in the cities of Slaver’s Bay, but if the ghastly mile markers are any indication, these people are especially despicable. Now the Mother of Dragons (Emilia Clarke) is angry, and her untamable offspring are getting surly and massive. (Not sure if the cows of Essos graze on pure H.G.H. or what, but that was some growth spurt.) Might we finally see some Michael Bay-level fiery death from above? One can hope.
A new character in Khaleesi’s camp threw me somewhat. Actually it was an old character with a new face: Daario Naharis, the flirty commander, is now played by Michiel Huisman instead of Ed Skrein. The casting change was reported months ago, but I still found it jarring, in part because the Second Darrin effect is discombobulating even in the best of circumstances. But here it’s even more so because Mr. Huisman seems to be playing essentially the same rogue he’s been on “Nashville” for the past couple seasons. Even his thing for steely but softhearted blondes appears unchanged.
Indeed, despite its charms and the visceral pleasure of returning to Westeros, Sunday’s premiere knocked me out of the narrative more often than most episodes of “Game of Thrones.” Aside from the Second Daario situation, there was also Prince Oberyn’s clunky exposition of his Lannister grudge — most of which could have been handled by Tyrion minutes earlier — and an odd propensity toward broad comedy.
There was the silly cut between the statue of Joffrey vanquishing the wolf — hilarious on its own — and the king himself employing the same faux-heroic stance. Olenna Tyrell’s cheeky dismissal of the wedding necklace — her husband gave her one just like it, she says, before tossing it over her shoulder (ha!) — came off like an outtake from “The Golden Girls.” Dark contextual comedy has always been a welcome element on the show — see the Hound’s profanely succinct critique of sword-namers — but the tonal disconnect of the borscht belt stuff stopped me cold.
But these are small, subjective things to file under I-carp-because-I-care. Otherwise the episode, written by the series creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, did a good job of setting up the season and introducing new characters without wasting time on draggier subplots. Presumably Theonis still being tormented somewhere by the bug-eyed weirdo Ramsay, but it mercifully happened off-screen. The joyless Stannis and his one-note priestess (sacrifice this, Lord of Light that) also were not missed, though they’ll be back around soon enough.
Over all the premiere nicely managed a tricky shift into the new era of the series and left me excited to see what comes next. What say you?
A FEW THOUGHTS WHILE WE POLISH OUR HAND
• I’m moved by the developing midlife crisis for Jaime — he turned 40, got himself a fancy new sword and Bond villain appendage, and is moping about his legacy and lack of accomplishment. (A measly half-page in the Book of Brothers!) People are telling him he’s lost it and are unarguably correct, at least in the case of his hand. But I do miss the bon vivant Kingslayer, the guy who scared everyone and would say and do terrible things, “for love” and otherwise, with buccaneering verve. Clearly he was humbled by last season’s odyssey and the transformative friendship of a giant warrior maiden, but here’s hoping the old Jaime isn’t gone for good.
• Poor Sansa. She’s spent much of the series being a bit of a twit, but no one deserves what she’s gotten. Now she’s sleepless and starving herself, untempted even by pigeon pie and lemon cakes. That was an intriguing scene between her and the knight-turned-fool Dontos Hollard. Any guesses about how that necklace might come into play later? (Please don’t spoil it for the rest of us if you know from the books.)
• I never figured Tyrion was the one trying to bribe Shae into leaving King’s Landing, but I admit that I’m sort of stumped about whom it might be. Theories? She may want to reconsider and get out of town before Cersei gets her claws into her.
• I know the Arya and Hound show can’t go on forever, but man, do I enjoy it. Their splattery (sound design!) rumble in the tavern, with Arya’s revenge on the contemptible Polliver, offered probably the most pure fun in the premiere. Young Arya’s body count keeps climbing — is anyone on her death list safe now that she’s horse-bound and reunited with Needle? Signs point to no, as long as she doesn’t get between the Hound and his chicken.


