Each winter, as we fight our way through an increasingly bitter and frozen world, muddling along in our shaggy pelts like a bunch of Samwell Tarlys, we want to watch “Game of Thrones,” the wintriest of shows, and we have to wait till spring. Winter oppresses and thwarts us; Westeros would make for a distracting getaway. Now that spring is finally here, winter is coming: the synth cello, the Seven Kingdoms, the monsters, princes, dragons, women warriors, and legions of eunuchs. Hello, old friends. In the season-five première, “The Coming Wars,” which aired tonight, they’re all trying to strategize.
There’s much to consider. Last season, our murderous and lusty pals the Lannisters lived through an impressive amount of regicide and related crimes. The horrible young King Joffrey, who really had it coming, drank poison at his own wedding; his grandfather Tywin, one of the family’s few official grownups, got the old crossbow-on-the-toilet from his son Tyrion (Peter Dinklage). In the wake of those deaths, there’s new opportunity, new instability. Power in the realm is more up for grabs than ever. And without Tywin around to enforce his disgustingly pragmatic wedding concepts, Cersei (Lena Headey) and Loras (Finn Jones) might not have to get married. Suddenly just about everyone has crucial decisions to make, and more freedom than they might want.
In the opening scenes, Cersei and Tyrion are each shown riding somewhere in a sort of box. Cersei’s is a gilded palanquin carried by servants; Tyrion’s is a crate with scuzzy air holes. Cersei, elegant and composed, emerges at the castle; Tyrion, freed from certain death by the crafty eunuch Varys (Conleth Hill), rolls out of his crate onto the ground, gasping, greasy, glowering, muttering about shit. Cersei seems to have everything and Tyrion seems to have nothing. He’s miserable, and self-pitying as hell, depressed about all of his murdering, his journey, his future. He has yet to realize that he is free: his repulsive crate has brought him to a place beyond his siblings’ imagining.
While those siblings are at the palace, arguing about their enemies over their father’s corpse, Tyrion has arrived at an orangey paradise, a patio with beige curtains and fruit trees and sunshine: the home of a merchant Varys knows, another political idealist. “We tried to do what was best for the realm by supporting a Targaryen restoration,” Varys says. Now they need to talk about the future.
“The future is shit, just like the past,” Tyrion says. He barfs. Well put, everybody.
One of the appeals of this show, and of dramas such as “The Sopranos,” “The Wire,” and “Breaking Bad,” is that they let us imagine living in a society on the edge of lawlessness, in which people play by different rules, obeying a code enforced by violence, with peace eked out by carefully negotiated trust. There’s a wild vicarious freedom that comes from watching a character on one of these shows deliciously break a rule we couldn’t break. And there’s comfort in knowing that in our own, more humdrum world, weddings and bloodbaths don’t usually happen at the same time.
In “The Wars to Come,” the stresses of living in such a world comes to the forefront. One of the pleasures of watching it comes from feeling relief that we don't have to make Westeros-level decisions: it's not easy being a vengeful or an ethical Lannister. People who have kind impulses are imperilled for acting on them, because the brutes are tough and plentiful. And there are always more wars to come. Luckily, the god of this universe, its novels’ author, George R. R. Martin, tends to be loyal to underdogs.
The underdogs are stressed out. In Meereen, Daenerys (Emilia Clarke) is struggling to govern a former slave city. She wants to live and rule by her principles—freeing the powerless, leading through strength and fairness—but it’s tricky. Up north, Jon Snow (Kit Harington) is being a mensch as usual, mentoring people and attempting an uneasy negotiation between the Night’s Watch, the Wildlings, and the trio that gets my vote for Most Tedious in the Seven Kingdoms: Stannis Baratheon, his horrible spooky attaché Melisandre, and their friend Davos Seaworth. These three have come north, like carpetbaggers, hoping to bolster Stannis’s claim to the throne and make strangers fight for them. Jon Snow has principles and the respect of all who know him, but he has only so much power. What should he do? (One idea: avoid Melisandre, who asks him if he’s a virgin, and is always up to no good.)
As the episode proceeds, the decision-making becomes more intense. In their seaside orange grove, Varys takes another stab at reminding Tyrion of his opportunities. (It’s too bad that existentialism doesn’t exist in this world: Tyrion’s glowering would go well with some Sartre.) “You never told me why you set me free,” he says.
Varys says that Jaime asked him to, and that he “did it for the Seven Kingdoms.” He believes in him: Tyrion has his father’s instinct for politics, Varys says, plus compassion. He says that he wants “a land where the powerful do not prey on the powerless,” and that he thinks Tyrion should help bring to power “someone stronger than Tommen but gentler than Stannis, who can intimidate the high lords and inspire the people. A ruler loved by millions with a powerful army and a ripe family name.” Tyrion is skeptical. It’s rare that anyone on “Game of Thrones” presents an ideal vision of happiness, political or otherwise. (Tyrion mocks it: “And the castles are made of gingerbread and the moats are filled with blackberry wine.” No offense, Tyrion, but that kingdom sounds terrible.) Then Varys unveils his thrilling idea. Instead of staying there and drinking himself to death, he tells Tyrion, “you can ride with me to Meereen, meet with Daenerys Targaryen, and decide if the world is worth fighting for.”
Varys’s plan is probably doomed, but it’s exciting: two underdog heroes teaming up and fighting the good fight. But the notion of Tyrion and Daenerys existing in the same scene, in the same world, is hard to wrap one’s mind around. Tyrion’s world is tragicomic; Dany’s is dramatic and poetic. She’s a moral warrior heroine, a beauty with dragons and magic attached to her, and, when we’re lucky, muscle-bound lovers who don’t wear conventional shirts. You almost don’t want to see Tyrion’s mud and goofery and wine goblets enter into it. (Though the idea is only a few degrees stranger than that of Tyrion marrying Sansa, and somehow we all survived that.) Can Tyrion summon the heroism he had at the Battle of Blackwater? Could he teach Dany what he knows about the politics of the Seven Kingdoms? He remains unconvinced, and gamely decides to drink himself to death en route to Meereen. But it’s progress.

